# Planning document

## How to organize data within `.datashelf/` directory?

For v0.1.0, we can follow an accepted standard. From some cursory research, a commonly recommended directory structure for data science is [Cookie Cutter Data Science](https://cookiecutter-data-science.drivendata.org/). In their structure, they have 4 "labels" for data:

    1. External - Data from third party sources.
    2. Interim - Intermediate data that has been transformed
    3. Processed - The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
    4. Raw - The original, immuatable data dump.

In a MVP mock up of `DataShelf`, we used 'collections' (subdirectories of `.datashelf/`) to organize data by "topic" **and** tags to categorize data by its place in the modeling process (raw, intermediate, ad-hoc, etc.). In retrospect, this seems like an overcomplicated approach for an early version of the tool. To keep things simple and just build out some bare-bones utility, we will focus only on tagging datasets in their metadata entries. Users can tag a dataset based on CCDS' categories and then filter by them when viewing their datashelf. 

## What information needs to be in `.datashelf/`'s metadata?

Again, for v0.1.0, the key focus will be on making the simplest implementation that adds utility to our workflow. So far, the following fields seem immediately necessary:

    1. File name - Could be auto-generated from a user inputted name and tag.
    2. File hash - We need some way of evaluating whether a dataset is meaningfully different so we aren't storing redundant data
    3. User message - It would be nice to be able to write some comments about what exactly the data represents (there should probably be a character limit though)
    4. Tag - CCDS-inspired tags for data to allow the user to filter

Outside of these fields, we are also considering a `Deleted` field to allow users to delete datasets in a way that allows for the data to be recovered. If we have an autogenerated filename, we don't need to store the filepath to the actual data file since it'll be predictable everytime.

## What are the key "operations" we need to create?

1. Create a DataShelf directory
    - If a user calls it without any args, it should be created in whatever directory they're in
    - If a user passes a specific path, it should be created with the specified path 

2. Auto-create a config and metadata file 
    - When a `.datashelf/` directory is made, a config.yaml and metadata.yaml file should automatically be created with basic information already filled out.
    - Config file should default to enforcing CCDS tags

3. Add a dataset to DataShelf
    - When a dataset is added to datashelf, a compressed version of the file should be saved into `.datashelf/` and a properly-filled-out entry should be added to metadata.yaml.
    - When user calls save function from CLI, they should get a guided process to fill out all of the necessary info -> the program should enforce tag rules if config says to.
    - When user calls from a jupyter notebook or python script, they should have a simple & clean function to call. 
    - We will need to design different processes for uploading a file in CLI vs notebook -> in a CLI, the user should pass the path of their dataset and we should compress it and copy it to `.datashelf/` vs in a notebook the user should pass a dataframe object (for now we can just support pandas) and we will compress the object and add it to `.datashelf/`
        - These should be two separate functions -> CLI process can be `load` and pandas df process can be `save`

4. View DataShelf
    - Function should display a neatly formatted rich-text table of all the entries in the metadata
    - User should be able to pass optional args to filter DataShelf before displaying (e.g. show only raw data)

5. Load a dataset from DataShelf
    - There are many different ways to approach "loading": 
        - Return filepath so user can pass into selected function (pandas load, polars load, dask, spark, etc.)
        - Directly load chosen dataset into a pandas dataframe
    - For v0.1.0, we should have:
        1. A library-agnostic version that returns the dataset's path so the user can just use that in whatever loading function they want
            - Ideally, a user could select what format they want their data in (this might added undue complexity so we should leave it for a subsequent version)
        2. A pandas-based loading function that returns the data loaded as a pandas dataframe
        
6. Checkout a dataset from Datashelf:
    - Rather than loading a dataset, checking out should allow the user to copy that actual stored file to a directory of their choice. 
